README.md, before:

# tinyurl

Minimal URL shortener for quick links. Built with **FastAPI** and **SQLite**. Simple UI for creating links plus REST endpoints.

## Features
- Create short URLs  
- Redirect using `/{code}`  
- List all URLs with hit counter  
- Delete a short URL  
- Persistent storage (SQLite)  
- Minimal HTML UI (no frameworks)

## Prerequisites
- Python 3.10+  
- pip  
- Virtual environment (recommended)

## Setup

# clone
git clone https://github.com/leenaelbarq/tinyurl.git
cd tinyurl

# venv
python3 -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate  # Windows: .venv\Scripts\activate

# install
pip install -r requirements.txt

# run
uvicorn app.main:app --reload

Open:
- UI → http://127.0.0.1:8000
- API Docs → http://127.0.0.1:8000/docs

## Endpoints
| Method | Endpoint | Description |
|--------|-----------|-------------|
| POST | /shorten | Shorten a long URL ({"url": "https://example.com"}) |
| GET | /{code} | Redirects to the original URL |
| GET | /urls | List all shortened URLs and hit counts |
| DELETE | /urls/{code} | Delete a shortened URL |

## Run Tests
Run tests and view coverage (locally):
```
./scripts/run_tests.sh
```
or
```
python -m pytest -q --cov=app --cov-report=term-missing --cov-fail-under=70
```

## Project Structure
tinyurl/
├── app/
│   ├── __init__.py
│   ├── main.py          # FastAPI app + routes
│   ├── db.py            # SQLite engine/session
│   ├── models.py        # SQLAlchemy models
│   ├── services.py      # business logic (create/list/get/delete)
│   ├── templates/
│   │   └── index.html   # minimal UI
│   └── static/          # static assets
├── tests/
│   └── test_app.py      # test for shorten and redirect
├── requirements.txt
├── tinyurl.sqlite3      # local DB (auto-created)
├── .gitignore
└── README.md

## Quick Usage
1. Run the app.  
2. Paste any long URL in the field and click Shorten.  
3. Use the generated short URL to redirect.  
4. View all links and delete unwanted ones.  
5. Optionally, open /docs for the interactive API page.
6. Health endpoint → GET /health
7. Metrics endpoint → GET /metrics (Prometheus format)

## Docker / Container

Build Docker image:
```
docker build -t tinyurl:latest .
```

Run with docker-compose (includes a Prometheus container):
```
docker-compose up --build
```

Prometheus UI will be available at http://localhost:9090 and the app at http://localhost:8000

Grafana: create a dashboard using `monitoring/grafana_dashboard.json` to visualize metrics and request latency/errors.

## CI/CD / Deployment notes

- The CI workflow is in `.github/workflows/ci.yml` and it runs pytest with coverage; the workflow enforces a 70% coverage threshold.
- The CD workflow builds and pushes a container image to GitHub Container Registry in `.github/workflows/deploy.yml` when pushes are made to `main`.
- To enable pushing to GHCR, ensure your repository has the appropriate `GITHUB_TOKEN` and registry permissions.


## SDLC Model
This project followed a Lean / Iterative model.  
It started with the core shorten and redirect functions, then expanded step-by-step with testing, a minimal UI, and cleanup. Each phase allowed fast feedback and improvement without overcomplication.

## DevOps Reflection
To adapt this app for DevOps practices:
- Add a Dockerfile for containerization.  
- Configure GitHub Actions for CI (automatic testing on push).  
- Deploy to a platform like Render or Railway.  
- Later migrate from SQLite to a production database like PostgreSQL.  
- Add monitoring endpoints and automated formatting/linting checks.
Additional notes:
- CI: GitHub Actions workflows provided in `.github/workflows/` for test and container image build (push-only on `main`).
- Docker: `Dockerfile` and `docker-compose.yml` included for local development and monitoring with Prometheus.

## Academic Honesty
I used GitHub Copilot and AI tools occasionally for syntax help, debugging, and structuring repetitive sections (like test setup and function templates).  
All code, logic, and design decisions were fully implemented and verified by me to ensure I understood how every part works.

Commit message:

chore: add pretest/status_kill/restart scripts and README docs; cleanup DB after tests

README.md, after:

# tinyurl

Minimal URL shortener for quick links. Built with **FastAPI** and **SQLite**. Simple UI for creating links plus REST endpoints.

## Features
- Create short URLs  
- Redirect using `/{code}`  
- List all URLs with hit counter  
- Delete a short URL  
- Persistent storage (SQLite)  
- Minimal HTML UI (no frameworks)

## Prerequisites
- Python 3.10+  
- pip  
- Virtual environment (recommended)

## Setup

# clone
git clone https://github.com/leenaelbarq/tinyurl.git
cd tinyurl

# venv
python3 -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate  # Windows: .venv\Scripts\activate

# install
pip install -r requirements.txt

# run
uvicorn app.main:app --reload

Open:
- UI → http://127.0.0.1:8000
- API Docs → http://127.0.0.1:8000/docs

## Endpoints
| Method | Endpoint | Description |
|--------|-----------|-------------|
| POST | /shorten | Shorten a long URL ({"url": "https://example.com"}) |
| GET | /{code} | Redirects to the original URL |
| GET | /urls | List all shortened URLs and hit counts |
| DELETE | /urls/{code} | Delete a shortened URL |

## Run Tests
Run tests and view coverage (locally):
```
./scripts/run_tests.sh
```
or
```
python -m pytest -q --cov=app --cov-report=term-missing --cov-fail-under=70
```

## Project Structure
tinyurl/
├── app/
│   ├── __init__.py
│   ├── main.py          # FastAPI app + routes
│   ├── db.py            # SQLite engine/session
│   ├── models.py        # SQLAlchemy models
│   ├── services.py      # business logic (create/list/get/delete)
│   ├── templates/
│   │   └── index.html   # minimal UI
│   └── static/          # static assets
├── tests/
│   └── test_app.py      # test for shorten and redirect
├── requirements.txt
├── tinyurl.sqlite3      # local DB (auto-created)
├── .gitignore
└── README.md

## Quick Usage
1. Run the app.  
2. Paste any long URL in the field and click Shorten.  
3. Use the generated short URL to redirect.  
4. View all links and delete unwanted ones.  
5. Optionally, open /docs for the interactive API page.
6. Health endpoint → GET /health
7. Metrics endpoint → GET /metrics (Prometheus format)

## Useful local scripts

All scripts are under the `scripts/` folder. Use these to run, test, and manage the local server safely:

- `./scripts/pretest.sh` — Ensure venv exists, activate it, set `PYTHONPATH`, install requirements, and run tests with coverage. Use this to reproduce the CI tests locally.
- `./scripts/start_server.sh` — Start the app using uvicorn in the background. It will try to stop any process on port 8000 first.
- `./scripts/stop_server.sh 8000` — Stop processes listening on the given port (default 8000).
- `./scripts/status_server.sh 8000` — Show which process is listening on the port.
- `./scripts/status_kill.sh 8000` — Show and kill only processes owned by the current user on the port (safer than `stop_server.sh`).
- `./scripts/restart_server.sh` — Stop and start the server in a single command.
- `./scripts/check_server.sh` — Check `/health`, `/metrics` and `POST /shorten` with `curl`.


## Docker / Container

Build Docker image:
```
docker build -t tinyurl:latest .
```

Run with docker-compose (includes a Prometheus container):
```
docker-compose up --build
```

Prometheus UI will be available at http://localhost:9090 and the app at http://localhost:8000

Grafana: create a dashboard using `monitoring/grafana_dashboard.json` to visualize metrics and request latency/errors.

## CI/CD / Deployment notes

- The CI workflow is in `.github/workflows/ci.yml` and it runs pytest with coverage; the workflow enforces a 70% coverage threshold.
- The CD workflow builds and pushes a container image to GitHub Container Registry in `.github/workflows/deploy.yml` when pushes are made to `main`.
- To enable pushing to GHCR, ensure your repository has the appropriate `GITHUB_TOKEN` and registry permissions.


## SDLC Model
This project followed a Lean / Iterative model.  
It started with the core shorten and redirect functions, then expanded step-by-step with testing, a minimal UI, and cleanup. Each phase allowed fast feedback and improvement without overcomplication.

## DevOps Reflection
To adapt this app for DevOps practices:
- Add a Dockerfile for containerization.  
- Configure GitHub Actions for CI (automatic testing on push).  
- Deploy to a platform like Render or Railway.  
- Later migrate from SQLite to a production database like PostgreSQL.  
- Add monitoring endpoints and automated formatting/linting checks.
Additional notes:
- CI: GitHub Actions workflows provided in `.github/workflows/` for test and container image build (push-only on `main`).
- Docker: `Dockerfile` and `docker-compose.yml` included for local development and monitoring with Prometheus.

## Academic Honesty
I used GitHub Copilot and AI tools occasionally for syntax help, debugging, and structuring repetitive sections (like test setup and function templates).  
All code, logic, and design decisions were fully implemented and verified by me to ensure I understood how every part works.
